[Music.]
Today the images are so familiar, they barely raise an eyebrow.
But in June 1965, the world watched in wonder as an American astronaut floated
into space history. Okay, my feet are out. Okay, I'm out.
Okay, shout. Ed White is the first American to walk in space, but he's not the
first man. A Russian was ten weeks earlier. America's Cold War enemy has won
every first of the space race. Ever since the Russian satellite Sputnik, the
United States has been second best.
Now the two superpowers are locked in a titanic struggle for world leadership,
and the moon has become the ultimate battleground. We felt we were in a war for
technological supremacy and primacy in the world, and we felt that America had
been challenged so badly and so strongly by the Russians that we were in the
hole. I've often thought that the space program, the space race, quote, unquote,
really took the place of a war. It wasn't a shooting battle, but to me it was
every bit as important as the other battles that were shooting battles, Vietnam,
Korea. The race to the moon is the adventure story of the century. A tale of
discovery and risk. our hero's sacrifice. For the United States, it will become
an eight-year obsession, costing $25 billion and harnessing the labors of 400
,000 American workers.
It is fueled by a booming economy and driven by the fear of falling behind a
Cold War enemy. But the final challenge comes from a dynamic leader who gambled
he could inspire his country to reach farther than anyone before. ...before this
decade is out of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the
Earth. And in the end, an epic journey launched out of cold political necessity
has the most human of consequences, a greater understanding of ourselves. The
Earth from here is a grand oasis of the big vastness of space.
In the race to the moon, both sides have their champions. The Soviet cosmonauts
are the vanguard of a new Russian revolution, heroes at the march to supremacy
in space. America's astronauts are treated more like movie stars than military
test pilots. They're the best of the best, and they know it. You had to know you
were good. You had to believe in yourself. You had to know by God when you made
a decision. you thought it was the right one. It's not that you just took behind
it, but you had to know you were good enough to make the right decision.
The men who ride the rockets into space get the glory, but they
take the risks, and the race to the moon has plenty of both. One of the things
you've got to remember about astronauts, they don't mind dying, but what they
can't stand is to screw up. So, they were always very, very focused on doing the
job right and that was the first thing they focused on. January 1967. America is
about to discover the terrible risks of the race. The Apollo program is getting
underway, the series of missions that will shoot for the moon. The first rides
are going to veterans Gus Grissom, Ed White and rookie Roger Chaffee. Their
capsule is still plagued with technical problems But NASA is moving quickly to
land a man on the moon by the end of the decade The Apollo 1 launch is just over
three weeks away At 6.31pm, January 27, 1967 Grissom, White, and Chaffee sit
atop their rocket For what should be another routine test Roger Chaffee was over
in the right-hand couch Gus Grissom was over in the left side and Ed White was
in the middle. Suddenly, there's a spark and a flash fire fueled by pure oxygen
rips through the capsule. Ed White's job was to reach up behind his head and try
and undo, because they were lying on their backs, to try and undo this hatch.
But the hatch is a killer. There's a fatal design flaw. It takes 90 seconds to
open. The fire needs only 20 seconds to burn through the astronauts oxygen
hoses. The fire is so intense it ruptures the hull of the capsule. For a lot of
people it was very hard to think of astronauts dying, not in space, not in the
course of a mission, not because the booster blows up, but on the pad where
there are rescue workers on the other side of the hatch and they can't do
anything to save them.
I can remember being at the grave site of Roger Chaffee, who was my neighbor at
the time, and when that final load of taps sounded, I wondered whether that
wasn't a death knoll for the entire Apollo program.
From this moment, the Apollo 1 tragedy becomes known simply as the fire. NASA
doesn't fly again for 18 months. Astronaut Frank Borman rallies the troops.
Frank had a way of putting things. We can't find any one person to blame for
this thing. We're all to blame for it. We knew what was going on. We just did
not appreciate the danger and the risk that we were taking, and we hadn't taken
all the necessary precautions. So in a sense, we were all guilty, and probably
we all carried a sense of that guilt. NASA is still recovering from the fire
when the Soviets are stopped in their tracks by their own disaster. They lose
their first cosmonaut when Vladimir Komarov's capsule hurtles into the ground at
400 miles per hour. After his state funeral, the Soviets too put their space
program on hold. Neither side flies for a year and a half. Then suddenly, in the
autumn of 1968, the race is back on. The next big goal for both sides is to put
men in orbit around the moon. But Apollo's lunar module is still in the factory
when the CIA drops a bombshell.
The intelligence agency believes the Soviets are planning to loop men around the
moon. NASA takes a gamble. Outdo the Russians by sending a manned flight to
orbit the moon ahead of schedule. A more difficult task. But NASA's own internal
memos show it's worried another failure poses grave risks to the Apollo program.
There might also be what it calls undue crew risk. It was a real sweaty
decision. There were some people who were violently opposed to it, But they
finally all climbed on board and said, okay, you know, the equipment's here. We
might as well give it a try. The equipment is the Saturn V. It's a monster, but
the only thing with enough brute force to propel Americans to the moon. The
Saturn V has been tested only twice unmanned. Now the crew of Apollo 8, Jim
Lovell, Bill Anders, and Frank Borman will be the first to ride the monster.
Ten, nine, we have ignition sequence start. The Saturn V is as powerful as a
small atomic bomb and every bit as violent. The engines are armed. And no one
who rides this rocket will ever forget it. They hear almost like a distant
rumble of thunder. And the rumbling kind of swells and now it's more of a roar
and it begins to penetrate even the walls of the spacecraft and their helmets.
And then finally, this thing gives a kind of a jolt and then leaves the Earth.
And with the thunder of the world's mightiest rocket, the race for the moon is
on with a vengeance.
We have liftoff.
Liftoff at 7.51am.
America's hopes to be first to the moon are riding on the monster Saturn V, and
for the crew of Apollo 8, it's the ride of a lifetime. And up in the command
module, these guys are being thrown around in their seats against against their
straps, it was so violent that Bill Andrews thought, you know, my God, we must
have caught a fin of the rocket on the tower and we're going to come down any
second. I had the sensation that maybe I was in the midst of a living thing.
Yeah, the gurgling and the shaking and there, it was an experience as if you
were an element of a living machine. As it climbed you could see it, really
peddling hard And you could see it start to pick up momentum as it burned off
tons and tons of fuel every second. It gave you the impression that this was a
machine on its way to someplace. That someplace is the moon's orbit. At 25,000
miles per hour, the Saturn V finally generates enough speed to burst free of
Earth's gravity. It is December 1968. The following yers in June, open stages.
Borman, Lovell, and Anders are the first spacemen—the first to leave Earth orbit
and dive into deep space. But while others may be moved to poetry, to Apollo 8's
commander, it's just a job. Apollo 8 was a great adventure, but it was also hard
work. I've never been romantically inclined about space travel. Star Trek I've
never seen that doesn't at all interest me. All I knew, I was going on an
important mission, and I wanted to do it right. Borman is all business, with no
time for excess baggage. It was hard enough to think about going to the moon and
coming back. Don't complicate things with things like a TV camera. I mean, he
didn't want the TV camera because he thought it was going to be a bother. But
Borman's been overruled, and the Earth sees itself from afar for the first time,
from a camera that nearly didn't make the ride. You're well looking
at yourselves to see it from 180,000 miles out in space. They are black and
white and fuzzy, but the power of these images is irresistible. We really did
see it in a new way. Lots of people look at those images and they say, golly,
you know, it really is this tiny little blue-green ball that's out there, white
clouds on it, and it looks different from anything else we've seen. And it's
just hanging there in this blackness. Mike, what I keep imagining is if I'm a
lonely traveler from another planet, what I think about the horizon from this
altitude, whether I think it'd be inhabited or not. On Christmas Eve, Apollo 8
orbits the moon 10 times. The moon is a different thing to each one of us. I
know my own impression is that it's a vast, lonely, forbidding type existence or
expanse of nothing. The voyage makes poets of them all. But it's not the moon
that finally catches Frank Borman's heart and eye. It is the home of everything
he holds dear, and it fills him with wonder. Aw. Aw. That's what it was. At that
point, I think we were all aware that this was a historic moment. And then it
was, okay, now let's go home. That didn't last too long, because we had a lot of
work to do then in preparation. This came at a node between getting there and
doing the work and then getting prepared for the trip home. And God said, Let
there be light. And there was light. And God saw the light. They was good. And
God divided the light from the darkness. I think Frank Borman came up with some
wonderful eloquent stuff during that television show when they read from
Genesis. And from the crew of Apollo 8, we close with good night, good luck, a
Merry Christmas, and God bless all of you, all of you on the good earth. All of
you on the good Earth, just to this day I get chills thinking about that. It's a
beautiful thing.
America's gamble pays off. NASA has won the first big heat in the race to the
moon. But the final and most dangerous challenge is still ahead. When we got
Apollo 8 out there, the Russians knew they had had it. It was that simple. But
they knew that a landing was not going to be very far away. So yeah, I think
Apollo 8 kind of put the nail in the coffin.
But the Russians aren't dead yet, and what the Americans don't know is that
Moscow still has an ace up its sleeve.
engines on 5, 4, 3, 2, all engines running. Launch commit, liftoff. We have
liftoff 49 minutes past the hour. 1969, the year the United States must put its
man on the moon. NASA has until year's end to fulfill President John Kennedy's
bold challenge. Five Apollo missions are scheduled. The workhorse, the Saturn V,
has never been pushed so hard, and the monster is delivering flawlessly. All
right, baby, we're on, we're on, we're on. They were just pumping out Saturn Vs
like, there was no tomorrow. I mean, there was a new launch every couple of
months. But the Soviets are far from quitting. A US spy satellite snatches top
secret photos of a giant new Soviet rocket, the N1. The evidence indicates the
Russians may finally be aiming a manned moon shot themselves. It looked to have
the same size, it looked to have the same capability that the Saturn V would
have. It was a moon rocket. What they didn't know was that the Soviets were
having enormous problems with it. Every time they tried to launch that N1, it
blew up on them. Seconds into the launch, they just exploded. it uh roger
Houston Apollo 10 you can tell the world that we have arrived may 1969 Apollo
10. the dress rehearsal for the moon landing eugene cernan and tom stafford will
do everything but touch down buzzing the moon surface closer than anyone before
i mean when we came down we were screaming across that surface and we're 47 000
feet above the quote sea level part of the surface but we had gigantic mountains
tarring up. Oh, Houston, Houston, this is Snoopy. Right, Snoop, go ahead. It's
going. We is down among them, Charlie. And I said, boy, we is down among them. I
don't know what happened to my English language when I got to the moon, but it
changed. I don't know, there's something in me, but boy, I just felt like when
we were coming down over those mountains, we had to pick up our feet because we
were going to just, you know, we're going to drag the landing gear of the lunar
module over the top of some of those mountains. We were so close. The sea of
tranquility, which men have eyed for centuries. The Apollo 10 crew sees it in
more detail than Galileo ever dreamed. It is here the first landing will be
attempted in just eight weeks. The Apollo 10 looks a lot smoother than some of
the orbiter photos show. It still estimates twenty-five to thirty percent in a
semi-clear area. Cernan and Stafford are just here to survey, but they're so
close they can almost make history themselves. Knowing that it was Cernan and
Tom Stafford, two wild men in charge at that point, there's a lot of us that
were kind of thinking, you know, I wonder if they really will. And would not
have been surprised to see them say, oh, what the heck, you know. But they
weren't truly. They weren't outfitted for a landing. But the thought runs
through Eugene Cernan's mind, given the chance he and Stafford could have been
first to make the giant step. You know, had we had fuel, we could have gone down
and we could have landed. And we would've done it successfully. We'll never know
now, but I still think we could have.
Then suddenly without warning, the lunar module lurches out of control and
Cernan nearly gets his wish to be first on the moon. Here we are, all of a
sudden my world changed. I'm looking at this fantastic science fiction world,
and then all of a sudden we're in chaos. All of a sudden the whole thing started
gyrating wildly. I mean Gene Cernan looked out the window and saw the moon's
horizon just tilt rapidly and start to swing like he was on some kind of a
carnival ride. ...We've got a while... We don't know how
much of our spacecraft is rolling and spinning and all of a sudden we got it
under control and got our breath. I found out later, much later, that from what
I understand we were two or three seconds away from it that continued of
eventually crashing on the moon. It's one more reminder of the risks of trying
to land men on the moon.
July 1969 NASA is ready to take the final step Apollo 11 will try for a landing
Neil Armstrong, Michael Collins and Buzz Aldrin Have sweated every detail From
deploying experiments to scooping lunar soil Armstrong is the commander Everyone
agrees there are none better This was a cool guy And he had a reputation for
being such an extremely skilled pilot, who would keep his cool in very bad
situations. Armstrong showed it when he narrowly cheated death during a test in
the lunar landing research vehicle. Neil had to eject out of that at one point
because the machine started to behave badly. And had he stayed with it, he
probably would've been killed. So he had the ability to know when the situation
was getting out of hand, and he got out of there. Armstrong is not only good,
he's lucky. Thirteen days before Apollo 11 is to lift off, his competition
suffers a mortal blow. The Soviets launch another N1 rocket, and again it
explodes. But this time, the spy photos show the blast has completely destroyed
the N1 launch pad. They had hopes of being able to scoop the U.S. one more time.
They weren't able to make that in one work, and ultimately that was the downfall
of their moon program. The Soviets might be out of the race, but they can still
play the spoiler. And they're secretly planning a last-ditch end run as
Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins prepare to fly. July 16th, 1969. A day eight
years in the making. 300 feet above the ground in the so-called white room at
the top of the launch tower, technicians are easing Neil Armstrong and Michael
Collins into their Apollo 11 capsule. Buzz Aldrin is outside on the gantry,
alone with the towering Saturn V. The white room was up above me. I got off the
elevator because they don't want too many people waiting around while they put
in first one crewman, then the other. And the sun is just coming up and the
peaceful waves are coming in. and I knew that this was a moment that I wanted to
savor in some way and retell about, because it was a moment of serenity. You
know, what did I know about what was going to happen in the next several days?
But here it was, and I thought, this is a moment I just want to remember. My
ride is number one in CDR. Number one in CDR... In mission control, the tension
rises. Everyone feels the pressure to do well, to be at the top of their form,
and in the last minutes before launch, each man finds his own way to weather the
countdown. For me, it's a little bit of our father time. I mean, I kind of
realized we're going to light something off that's pretty explosive. So I always
take a moment to say a little prayer. Many of the flight controllers hold the
power of an abort or a go at any time. Many are hotshots in their 20s and 30s.
as arrogant and confident in their own abilities as the astronauts. They don't
mind being out on the end of the diving board, alone, with nobody else. They'll
make a decision. And if they don't know how to do that, they won't last. Five,
four, three, two, one, zero. All engines running. Lift off. We have a lift off.
32 minutes past the hour. Big talk on Apollo 11.
Astronaut Michael Collins thinks they have only a 50-50 chance of succeeding.
And on the flight to the moon, the astronauts have written out of the flight
plan anything that might be a distraction. They want to concentrate on what's
ahead. We didn't really want to have distractions that were not contributing
directly to the mission success, which was a safe landing on the moon, a
confidence that we knew what we were doing when we got there, and then a safe
departure. So there was a lot of time to just look out the window. But already
circling the moon is Russia's last ditch ploy, an unmanned Soviet probe launched
three days earlier to steal the glory of Apollo 11. Very few people know that
Apollo 11 astronauts were racing Russian robot to the Moon. Lunar 15's mission
is to scoop 100 grams of lunar soil, then get back to Earth first. It's a
preemptive strike that just might work. Its would fly faster than Apollo 11,
that's why the soil would be delivered approximately one day earlier than the
Apollo 11 return to Earth. Then, the Soviets could claim their robot and not
accomplished what America needed three men to do. But for now, Washington
doesn't know Luna 15's purpose or orbit, so it takes an unusual step. It asks
the Russians for details and gets an answer. Americans were very much concerned
about this robot and they even issued the request for the Soviet government to
ensure that Luna 15 would not hit Apollo 11. and the Russian government even
responded that there's no danger and the robot is under control.
The next morning, the Eagle separates from Columbia and prepares for a landing.
Eagle, Houston...you're a go for PDI, over. Neil Armstrong's focused
like never before in his flying career. Eagle looking great, you're a go. And
your whole concentration is on finding a place to land, a safe place to land. So
if you're Neil Armstrong in those last minutes, as soon as that lunar module
pitches forward and begins the final descent, you are looking at the place where
you're heading to see where the computer is taking you. You go to continued
power descent. You're a go to continued power descent. Then, at 33,000 feet,
there's a mission-threatening alarm. It was a reading on the 1202 program alarm.
Roger 1202. And about that time, we get a program alarm. This interrupts our
train. Why are you bothering me? Nothing's going wrong, and yet you're flashing
a program alarm that we don't understand. Mission Control can see the Eagle's
computer is overloading. The 1202 alarm sends adrenaline surging, and a young
controller out on the end of the diving board must make the decision of his life
in seconds. Roger, we got you. We're going at alarm. You go to continue power
descent. You go to continue power descent. Altitude now 21,000 feet. Still
looking very good. Then at 16,000 feet, the computer shuts down again, another
alarm. I think there was a sense that if they didn't come too often, whatever
too often meant, I'm not sure, but if they didn't come too often, it was
probably okay as long as everything else looked okay. Good radar data. We're now
in the approach phase. Everything looking good. The Eagle's close, but it hasn't
landed yet. And privately, a large percentage of the engineers back in Houston
thought along the first attempt they would do that, that there would be an
abort, and probably number 12 or number 13 would be the ones that actually made
the landing, that didn't happen because of the guy who was on the stick.
Altitude 4200, go for landing, over.
[Silence.]
Adjourner then, go for landing. 3,000 feet. Now, just a half a mile above the
moon's surface, Neil Armstrong has his hands full. Beside him, Buzz Aldrin's
eyes are glued to the computer screen. Altitude, rate of descent, forward
movement. He's rattling off the numbers that Armstrong needs to land the Eagle.
Then, there's another alarm. 12-01. Roger, 12-01 alarm. We're go...
we're go! It's the last thing they need so close to the surface. Altitude,
velocity, light. 20 miles down, 220 feet. Your attention is diverted by these
alarms that could threaten the whole landing, and then once they tell you you
can keep going, you look out the window again, and my god, there is a crater the
size of a football field, and it's got boulders around it that are as big as
small cars, and this is the place where the computer is steering you for a
landing. So the prudent thing to do is to smoothly fly over that, but that's
also the thing that prolongs the mission. But that consumes more fuel.
Quickly Armstrong makes up his mind. He looked at his fuel. He says, I've got
that distance to fly. I can fly this like a helicopter and I can go over there
and put it down instead of here in this pile of rocks. And that was all that was
on Neil Armstrong's mind. But now the Eagle has only 60 seconds of fuel.
And it was getting a little close when 60 seconds was called out and the light
came on and then we're still 100 feet off the surface. one and a half, thirty
seconds forward to it. When we had thirty seconds and we only were still, oh I
guess maybe ten, fifteen feet, I felt we had it made then. It eased down. I
could see the shadow and the dust coming up. Two and a half, picking up some
dust. Three feet, two and a half now. We were picking up some dust. Great
shadow. And when he said that, it hit me that my god they're blowing dust off
the moon. and so for the first time, it had a realness to it. Contact light.
Okay, engine stopped. We copy you down, Eagle. Listen, Tranquility base here.
The Eagle has landed. Roger, Tranquility. We copy you on the ground, you got a
bunch of guys about to turn blue, we're breathing again, thanks a lot. Thank
you. And they landed with something like 20 seconds on the gauges, which seems
almost, you know, impossible. But again, you know, to a test pilot, 20 seconds
is a long time. He flew it in, flew it in. God bless him. There is a hill in
view. It has taken America eight long years, and the pride shows in the
astronauts' snapshots. But now the world waits while Armstrong and Aldrin make
sure they can leave quickly if there's an emergency. The wait is six and a half
agonizing hours. And it was very disconcerting, I think, to everybody back on
Earth that it did take us so long, but we felt it was so important to be very
deliberate about all the steps that we were taking. And one of the things that I
wanted to put into the flight plan, As soon as we touched down, I wanted to go
through the rehearsal for liftoff two hours later. Finally. OK, Houston, I'm on
the porch. Roger, Neil. And we're getting a picture on the TV. And currently
it's upside down on our monitor, but we can make out a fair amount of detail.
OK, Neil, we can see you coming down the ladder now. 600 million people are
watching on TV around the world. I'm gonna step off the limb now.
That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind. 14 minutes later,
Buzz Aldrin steps out and gropes for his own first words on the moon. It is
magnificent desolation. Beautiful view. Is that something? Magnificent
desolation. It was not my assignment to come up with a clever and meaningful
pronouncement upon my reaching the surface. But that's something that impressed
upon me at the time the magnificence of the achievement that we were a part of,
but what a desolate world we were visiting. Armstrong and Aldrin have just
enough time, two hours, to plant a flag, dedicate a plaque, became in peace for
all mankind, and speak to a president. Hello, Neil and Buzz. I'm talking to you
by telephone from the overall room at the White House. Then the astronauts
retire. And while they rest, the Soviets make their move. But something goes
wrong. Very wrong. Russia's desperate attempt to scoop lunar soil and get it
back to Earth first fails abruptly. According to the schedule, Lunar 15 was
supposed to land a day later after Apollo 11. But it crashed on the moon. The
crash kills the Soviets' last chance to steal Apollo 11's thunder. Our guidance
recommendation is pings. And you're cleared for takeoff. Roger, understand.
We're number one on the runway. Roger.
Beautiful. 26, 36 feet per second up. Five. Very smooth.
After Apollo 11, everything seems possible. NASA plans nine more moon missions,
and then a shot at landing a man on Mars.
As America celebrates the safe return of its first moonwalkers, one space
warrior knows the battle is done. Final analysis, at that point, I knew that a
very significant battle in the Cold War had been won. I lost an awful lot of
France and Korea. You can argue that we didn't win that one. And we won this
one.
But in the end, Apollo 11 will be a symbol of far more than a Cold War triumph.
The significance is not But really in the rocks that we brought back, it wasn't
the significance of what anybody really said, the poetic, whatever. It was that
so many people's lives were affected and when they think back, they say I didn't
remember where I was when that happened. Why? Because it had an impact on their
lives, it had a positive impact. And that really, to me, is the human spiritual
value of that. It's the human value totally. I still have an amazing feeling
when I go out and look at the Moon come up and think about the fact that all of
this really happened and that it happened in my lifetime and I was there to see
it. I think all of us who were alive when Apollo happened are really lucky to
have those memories.
By the early 1970s, astronauts are frolicking on the moon. But who could imagine
that America's fascination with exploring space would fade so quickly?
Washington is faced with a host of earthbound troubles, and it starts lopping
NASA's missions. The pressures of the Vietnam War were there and the politicians
had the sense that well, we've done it, now what? Here we've landed on the moon,
we've done something that people had dreamt about for hundreds if not thousands
of years. And by the second time it happens people were already starting to get
jaded. April 1970. Less than a year after the first moon landing, Apollo doesn't
even rate live TV coverage. Jim Lovell, Jack Swaggart, and Fred Hayes, the crew
of Apollo 13, are just another forgettable mission at first. Hey, Houston. We've
had Apollo here. Say again, please. Houston, we've had Apollo. 205,000 miles
from home, an explosion cripples Apollo 13 and swiftly focuses attention again
on the Moon missions. Okay, now, let's everybody keep cool. We got limbs still
attached. A young Glynn Lunney is one of the flight directors on Apollo 13. We
think we have the situation in control. I had this terrible sinking feeling, you
know, like I'd been kicked in the stomach that, wow, we got ourselves a
difficult thing here. Mission Control faces its most challenging task ever, a
space rescue. It has to bring back three men, alive. Losing a crew in space now
would surely cancel the remaining Apollo missions. Houston finds a way to bring
the crew back a day early, but to do so, Apollo 13 will have to fire its engine
briefly to align itself with Earth. If the capsule isn't pointed in the right
direction, the crew will skip off the Earth's atmosphere. So Mission Control
tells the crew to take a sighting on an object it can't miss. If they were
accurate, if the navigation system was accurate they'd see the sun right in the
crosshairs, and you know, if it wasn't accurate, they were in big trouble
because that meant that they had no way of aligning their navigation system to
make the rocket firings to get them home. A young Gerry Griffin is on duty. He's
listening and he hears Jim Lovell say, What have you got? What do you see, Fred?
And Fred says, I've got the upper right corner of the sun. And Lovell says,
We've got it. Lovell says, I've got it. He yelled it, essentially, on the, I've
got it. And I was trying to keep notes in the flight director log. And when I
went back here or even weeks later and looked at it, I could not read my
writing. My hand, I was so excited. His hand was shaking. from the tension so
badly that he could barely read his own writing
The drama had recaptured the world's attention but when it's over the Apollo
missions fade from sight once more
Two and a half years later December 1972, Eugene Cernan is atop a Saturn V
again. We have ignition two, one, zero, we have a lift-off. We have a lift-off
and it's lighting up the area. It's just like daylight here at Kennedy Space
Center. The Saturn V is moving off the pad. It has now cleared the tower. The
sun is setting on the Apollo program. This will be America's last trip to the
moon. 38 degrees. But this time, the man who blazed the trail for Apollo 11 and
stopped short makes it all the way down. Okay, stand by for pitch over. Are we
coming in? There it is. Proceed it. And there it is, Houston, there's Camelot. I
see it. I see it. Contact. Houston, you can tell America the Challenger
is a torus littro. Mr. Challenger, that's super. Finally, Eugene Cernan is on
the moon and at peace. And you've never known silence, or quietness, or
stillness in your entire life. In the air, the dust stops, the noise stops, the
movement stops. And to remind you of what it's all about is the earth surrounded
by blackness. Overpowering three-dimensional blackness, a blackness that I call
the infinity of time and the infinity of space and I don't know what that means.
I can't show it to you but I know it exists cause I saw it with my own eyes.
Oh, daddummit. Jack Schmidt, having a few problems. Astronaut Jack Schmidt, a
geologist, and Cernan spend three days on the surface. Longer than any other
mission. And at a crater named Shorty, they make the biggest scientific
discovery of the entire Apollo program. Oh, hey, there is orange soil. Well,
don't move it till I see it. It's all over. Orange! Don't move it till I see it.
I've stirred it up with my feet. Hey, it is! I can see it from here. It's
orange! When he found the orange soil, I said, the first thing I thought of was,
oh my God, Jack's been here too long. He's going to find something. And I went
over to look at it, and by God, it was orange. I couldn't believe it. It truly
was orange. And it was literally the only color other than shades of gray we
found on the surface moon. And I don't think anyone expected us to find it at
all. The orange soil is evidence of ancient lava flow with little time left.
We'd like you to leave immediately. Okay. My golly, this time goes fast. It is
an experience like none other. You're there. Yeah, we're happy to be there.
You've got to have fun. One thing I told Ron Evans and Jack Schmidt, I said,
you're only going to come this way one time. Enjoy it. Don't miss a thing. Just
enjoy it. I was strolling on the moon one day of May in the merry, merry, merry
month of December. Now, May. May? May is the month. May, that's right. May is
the year of the month. Then it's over. Eugene Cernon has known for a long time
that his will be the last footprints on the moon. When I took those last steps,
I wanted someone to recognize the significance, the importance of man having
walked on the moon during the 20th century. I'd like to just let what I believe
history will record, that America's challenge of today has forged man's destiny
of tomorrow. I felt the challenge that we accepted and what we had accomplished
during those short few years that we now call the Apollo years truly has opened
the door to the future, truly has told mankind we need to go further. We need to
do more. 3, 2, 1. Right that way Houston. That's for good. Apollo 17 writes
the last chapter in the great adventure. I do think history will look back and
say, my gosh, those folks did that back in the mid-1900's essentially. Did that
in the mid-1900s and then didn't do anything to follow up on it, maybe for
another 100 years. And that's going to be kind of a why. Four, three, two, one,
zero. We have booster ignition and liftoff of the spatial discovery as NASA...
Today, the shuttle keeps a manned presence in space, though at an Earth-hugging
altitude of 350 miles. Mars is what counts now, and humans could land there as
early as the year 2012, maybe 2019, says NASA, but nothing is carved in stone. I
think the question of human destiny is an important want here, and whether or
not we become a galactic people as opposed to an Earthbound people. But when a
decision is made to explore deep space again, man will follow in the footsteps
of some lucky men, some very lucky men, the first to look back from the moon to
a fragile planet they called home. They look at a photograph where somebody
interviews them and they're reminded of an extraordinary thing that they were
lucky enough to be part of and a place in history and an experience that's
literally unique in all of humanity. Their experience will always be unique.
There will never again be another group of people who were first to go to
another world. Gosh, I feel so lucky to have been there and I feel so fortunate
to have participated in it.
[Silence.]